Competition Rules.md, before:

### Swarmathon IV (2019) Competition Rules


The goal of the NASA Swarmathon competition is to program a swarm of robots to search an arena to find and collect as many resources as possible in a fixed period of time. The competition rules are described below. Note that the number of robots, the dimensions of the arena, and the length of time of each round are best estimates at this time, but may change before the final competition due to logistical considerations at the University of New Mexico. All teams must compete in simulation. The top teams from the virtual round will advance to the physical competition.


Teams must run an identical search algorithm in both simulation and physical robots. Teams may parameterize their algorithms, and they may also modify their treatment of sensor input to account for the reality gap. They may not modify the contents of the simulation directory of the base code; the virtual round of the competition will be run with the latest version of the SwarmBaseCode simulation.


Teams will need to program their robots to navigate around obstructions in the arena. The surface of Mars is varied, and there are a variety of naturally occurring obstacles that robots need to be able to circumvent.


0. Please suggest modifications to these rules by creating a GitHub pull request.


1. Tournament structure


      1.0. All rounds will be run with six robots.


      1.1. A team's score for each round will be the total collected out of two runs.


      1.2. All teams will begin the competition by participating in the virtual round.
      
      
      1.3. The top eight teams from the virtual round will advance to the physical quarter finals.


      1.4. The top four teams from the physical quarter finals will advance to the physical semi finals.


      1.5. The top two teams from the physical semi finals will advance to the physical finals.


      1.6. Refer to the "Breaking a tie" subsection near the bottom of this document for rules in the case of a tie score during a given round. 
      
      1.7 All rounds will be 30 minutes.



2. Resources



    2.1. Resources are represented by AprilCubes, foam cubes with [AprilTag](https://april.eecs.umich.edu/wiki/index.php/AprilTags) fiducial markers on all six sides. Note that all AprilTags on all sides are identical: every side is adhered with the [AprilTag from the 36h11 family with id=0](https://github.com/BCLab-UNM/SwarmBaseCode-ROS/blob/master/simulation/models/at0/materials/textures/atag-0.png).



    2.2. Each round's resource distribution will be predetermined and will not be disclosed to teams in advance of the competition. 


    2.3. "Collecting a resource" is defined as delivering an AprilCube to the 1 x 1 meter square [collection zone](https://github.com/BCLab-UNM/SwarmBaseCode-ROS/blob/master/simulation/models/collection_disk/materials/textures/collection_disk.png) at the center of the arena. In order to receive credit for the collection at the end of the round, the AprilCube must be touching the collection zone, or both overlapping the collection zone (in its airspace) **and** touching a cube which is counted as a scoring cube. 
    
    2.4. If resources that were previously delivered are pushed out of the collection zone by other robots during the round, those resources will no longer count toward the total resources collected by a team during a given round. 
    
    2.5. Scoring for each round will only occur at the end of the round, after all robot motion has been stopped.



    2.6. Scoring decisions of official competition judges are final.



    2.7. The initial placement of target cubes will not be inside the collection zone, nor will they be placed within 50 cm of the arena wall.



3. During the competition



   3.1. Teams may not communicate with their robots in any way during the competition. All robot actions must be autonomous, and starting and stopping of autonomous motion must only be initiated by the official competition staff.



   3.2. The robots used for the competition will be physically identical to the 3 robots provided to each team.



   3.3. If robot-robot communication is required, all communication must be done via ROS topics. Teams should not rely on particular hostnames or IP addresses being assigned to the competition robots.
   
   


4. During each round



    4.1. Each team’s code will be uploaded to the robots before the competition. We will use the **master** branch in each repository.



    4.2. At the beginning of each round, each team’s robots will be placed **roughly** 50 cm from the edge of the collection zone with each robot facing in toward the center of the collection zone. Teams should **not** expect a particular placement of robots about the collection zone other than their orientation towards the collection zone, nor should they expect the arena itself to be oriented in any specific direction. 



    4.3. Each robot should be prepared to receive and react to a start signal in the form of the published value ```2``` on the ```/robotName/mode``` topic, as well as a stop signal in the form of the published value ```1``` on the same topic (identical to the autonomous/manual radio button functionality in the GUI).



    4.4. Each robot must publish a string on the `/robotName/status` topic. This string (set to `online` by default in the SwarmBaseCode-ROS code base) should uniquely identify each team so that competition staff can ensure that the correct code is being run. For example, if a UNM team were to compete in the competition, they might publish the string `UNM: Go Lobos!` on the `/robotName/status` topic in order to uniquely identify their code. Teams that are submitting custom Arduino code should prepend a + symbol to their status message. This allows the arena technical team to pay special attention to uploading the custom Ardunio code and restoring the base Arduino code after the competition run.


5. Intervention

     5.1. In the Physical Competition, robots that become stuck due to any fault of the arena, or robots that collide with one another and become stuck, will be moved one meter away by robot wranglers at the direction of arena judges. Fault of the arena includes, for example, robots high-centering on April cubes and cowcatchers becoming stuck under the collection zone. The arena judge will make the final decision as to whether the arena is at fault. Robots in an arena may be replaced if it is determined that a robot's hardware has failed. No intervention will occur in the Virtual competition.
     
     5.2. If a robot is stuck on April Cubes for more than 30 seconds, the robot will be moved approximately one meter away and have its heading maintained.

     5.3. Robots that get stuck on arena walls or other robots will be moved approximately one meter away and turned to face away from the object. 
     
     5.4. If the same robot has gotten stuck on or collided with the same object(s) three times within a 1 minute period, the robot will be moved one meter away and turned to face away from the object. A recurrence of persistent collisions by a rover after having been oriented away from the obstacle may result in the rover's motors being switched off. This decision is at the discretion of the arena tech in consultation with the head tech. This is to avoid having the robot wranglers entirely occupied with preventing a rover from colliding repeatedly during the run.
     
     5.5. Each robot must operate at a safe speed in order to avoid damage from collisions with the walls and with other robots. At the discretion of Physical Competition judges, robots that repeatedly crash into walls, obstacles, or each other at high speeds will be removed from the arena for the remainder of the round.
     
     5.6. Before a robot is moved, its red emergency switch will be switched down to prevent the motors from turning and encoders detecting wheel motion. 

     5.7. If a robot fails because of a hardware malfunction, we will replace the robot during the run. These kinds of failures are sometimes as obvious as a wheel coming off, but it is often difficult to distinguish hardware and software failures. We will keep a close eye on all of the robots' network status, node output/status, sensor outputs, and diagnostic outputs. If a robot is behaving very differently from the others, then we will investigate closely from the master laptop. The arena tech in consultation with the lead tech will determine whether it is appropriate to replace a robot.

     5.7.1. If the techs determine that a robot needs to be replaced, the robot will be pulled from the arena and a standby robot will be set in the center at the arena's start position. Each arena will have at least two standby robots. These will be turned on for the entire run but will not have code running. Once the replacement is set at the arena's starting position it will be initialized and your team's code will start to run. We will work through this process as quickly as possible but it will take some time.

     5.7.2. Robots pulled from arenas for replacement will be taken to a repair trailer where the problem will be diagnosed and repaired by the hardware tech. The robot will be documented and then returned as standby for its original arena. Examples from previous years have included: motor hardware failure, cowcatchers detaching, and gripper hardware failure. 
   
     5.8. In the event of a robot failing to operate correctly due to a software malfunction outside the control of the team, the robot may be moved to a starting location near the collection zone and have its software restarted. The decision to restart a robot lies with the arena tech in consultation with the head tech. Example failures from previous years include the Ublox GPS node crashing. In rare cases, a software failure could require robot replacement. The same procedures for replacement due to physical malfunctions will be followed.


6. Breaking a tie

     6.1. In the event of a tie for 8th place at the end of the preliminary round, for 4th place at the end of the quarter-final round, 2nd place at the end of the semi-final round, or for the winner of the final round, the tied teams will compete head-to-head during a special tie breaker match. For this match, each team's robots and resources will be reset within their respective arenas. The team whose robots find and collect the most resources in 10 minutes will move on to the next round. If teams are still tied at the conclusion of the overtime match, the match will continue in a "sudden death" form, where the first team to score wins. If no team scores within 10 minutes in the sudden death phase neither team will move forward. 
     
     6.2. The head judge will make the final decision on resolving tie breakers.


7. Modifying the SwarmBaseCode-ROS code base


   7.1. Teams participating in the Physical competition are encouraged to modify any parts of the SwarmBaseCode-ROS code base, including adding or deleting ROS packages to better replicate the capabilities of their physical robots. However changes to the simulation files and Gazebo Plugins may only be made if accepted by the UNM developers through a pull request to the base code. This ensures a level playing field for all teams. If you modify the GUI code and the GUI crashes during a run, we will **NOT** restart the run. However, if you have **NOT** modified the code then we will restart it. You may modify the `/misc/rover_onboard_node_launch.sh` startup script, but **do not** change the name of the script itself. All committed code that is pushed to a team's GitHub repository by the cutoff date will be pulled and run onboard robots during the Physical competition.

If you modify the GUI code and the GUI crashes during a run, we will NOT restart the run. However, if you have NOT modified the code then we will restart it.

   7.2. Teams may modify the Arduino code. Loading the Arduino code must be fully automatic and triggered from the `/misc/rover_onboard_node_launch.sh` script. *Arduino code must be stored in a subdirectory of the teams repository called `arduino/swarmie_control/`*, i.e. `Swarmathon-TeamAbbrev/arduino/swarmie_control/` where Swarmathon-TeamAbbrev is your repository name.
   
   7.3. Because custom Arduino code requires extra logistics at the competition we need to know which teams will have modified Arduino code well before the competition. **Teams planning to modify the Arduino code must notify us at info@nasaswarmathon.com by March 10th, 2019.**

   7.4. **The rover status message must be modified to contain with a preceding "+" symbol. We will reload the stock arduino code after a run where custom arduino code was used.**

   7.5. Teams may not modify the contents of `/src/gazebo_plugins`.
   


8. Head judge discretion

   8.1. The head judge may disqualify a team at any point during the competition at their discretion.
  
   8.2. The head judge may modify these rules due to weather events or unforeseen circumstances.
  
   8.3. Competition rounds may be re-run at the discretion of the head judge. 

9. Obstacles

   9.1. Obstacles may be placed anywhere in the arena. There may be any number of obstacles.

   9.2. The obstacle size and shape will be the same as those modeled in the Gazebo simulations provided to teams.

   9.3. The placement and number of obstacles will not be communicated to teams before the competition.

10. Calibration Values

   We will provide a comma delimited file called KSC.cal to store the calibration values we obtain at UNM in the root of the home directory, i.e. `~/KSC.cal`. The calibration file will be in the following format:

   `min: { -N1, -N2, -N3 }  max: { +N4, +N5, +N6 }` 

   Where N1 through N6 are natural numbers. This is the same format the calibration code produces.  

   Before the competition the UNM tech team will calibrate the rovers and populate the KSC.cal file with the offset values.  

   We will also provide extended calibration data, this is at the request of teams who are writing custom Arduino code. This extended data will be stored in `~/KSC_extended_calibration.csv` and has the following format:

   `mag.X,mag.Y,mag.Z,accel.X,accel.Y,accel.Z,temperature (high
byte),temperature (low byte)`

Commit message:

The semi-finals and finals will be sudden death

Competition Rules.md, after:

### Swarmathon IV (2019) Competition Rules


The goal of the NASA Swarmathon competition is to program a swarm of robots to search an arena to find and collect as many resources as possible in a fixed period of time. The competition rules are described below. Note that the number of robots, the dimensions of the arena, and the length of time of each round are best estimates at this time, but may change before the final competition due to logistical considerations at the University of New Mexico. All teams must compete in simulation. The top teams from the virtual round will advance to the physical competition.


Teams must run an identical search algorithm in both simulation and physical robots. Teams may parameterize their algorithms, and they may also modify their treatment of sensor input to account for the reality gap. They may not modify the contents of the simulation directory of the base code; the virtual round of the competition will be run with the latest version of the SwarmBaseCode simulation.


Teams will need to program their robots to navigate around obstructions in the arena. The surface of Mars is varied, and there are a variety of naturally occurring obstacles that robots need to be able to circumvent.


0. Please suggest modifications to these rules by creating a GitHub pull request.


1. Tournament structure


      1.0. All rounds will be run with six robots.


      1.1. A team's score for each round will be the total collected out of two runs, except for the semi-final and final rounds which will be sudden death.


      1.2. All teams will begin the competition by participating in the virtual round.
      
      
      1.3. The top eight teams from the virtual round will advance to the physical quarter finals.


      1.4. The top four teams from the physical quarter finals will advance to the physical semi finals.


      1.5. The top two teams from the physical semi finals will advance to the physical finals.


      1.6. Refer to the "Breaking a tie" subsection near the bottom of this document for rules in the case of a tie score during a given round. 
      
      1.7 All rounds will be 30 minutes.



2. Resources



    2.1. Resources are represented by AprilCubes, foam cubes with [AprilTag](https://april.eecs.umich.edu/wiki/index.php/AprilTags) fiducial markers on all six sides. Note that all AprilTags on all sides are identical: every side is adhered with the [AprilTag from the 36h11 family with id=0](https://github.com/BCLab-UNM/SwarmBaseCode-ROS/blob/master/simulation/models/at0/materials/textures/atag-0.png).



    2.2. Each round's resource distribution will be predetermined and will not be disclosed to teams in advance of the competition. 


    2.3. "Collecting a resource" is defined as delivering an AprilCube to the 1 x 1 meter square [collection zone](https://github.com/BCLab-UNM/SwarmBaseCode-ROS/blob/master/simulation/models/collection_disk/materials/textures/collection_disk.png) at the center of the arena. In order to receive credit for the collection at the end of the round, the AprilCube must be touching the collection zone, or both overlapping the collection zone (in its airspace) **and** touching a cube which is counted as a scoring cube. 
    
    2.4. If resources that were previously delivered are pushed out of the collection zone by other robots during the round, those resources will no longer count toward the total resources collected by a team during a given round. 
    
    2.5. Scoring for each round will only occur at the end of the round, after all robot motion has been stopped.



    2.6. Scoring decisions of official competition judges are final.



    2.7. The initial placement of target cubes will not be inside the collection zone, nor will they be placed within 50 cm of the arena wall.



3. During the competition



   3.1. Teams may not communicate with their robots in any way during the competition. All robot actions must be autonomous, and starting and stopping of autonomous motion must only be initiated by the official competition staff.



   3.2. The robots used for the competition will be physically identical to the 3 robots provided to each team.



   3.3. If robot-robot communication is required, all communication must be done via ROS topics. Teams should not rely on particular hostnames or IP addresses being assigned to the competition robots.
   
   


4. During each round



    4.1. Each team’s code will be uploaded to the robots before the competition. We will use the **master** branch in each repository.



    4.2. At the beginning of each round, each team’s robots will be placed **roughly** 50 cm from the edge of the collection zone with each robot facing in toward the center of the collection zone. Teams should **not** expect a particular placement of robots about the collection zone other than their orientation towards the collection zone, nor should they expect the arena itself to be oriented in any specific direction. 



    4.3. Each robot should be prepared to receive and react to a start signal in the form of the published value ```2``` on the ```/robotName/mode``` topic, as well as a stop signal in the form of the published value ```1``` on the same topic (identical to the autonomous/manual radio button functionality in the GUI).



    4.4. Each robot must publish a string on the `/robotName/status` topic. This string (set to `online` by default in the SwarmBaseCode-ROS code base) should uniquely identify each team so that competition staff can ensure that the correct code is being run. For example, if a UNM team were to compete in the competition, they might publish the string `UNM: Go Lobos!` on the `/robotName/status` topic in order to uniquely identify their code. Teams that are submitting custom Arduino code should prepend a + symbol to their status message. This allows the arena technical team to pay special attention to uploading the custom Ardunio code and restoring the base Arduino code after the competition run.


5. Intervention

     5.1. In the Physical Competition, robots that become stuck due to any fault of the arena, or robots that collide with one another and become stuck, will be moved one meter away by robot wranglers at the direction of arena judges. Fault of the arena includes, for example, robots high-centering on April cubes and cowcatchers becoming stuck under the collection zone. The arena judge will make the final decision as to whether the arena is at fault. Robots in an arena may be replaced if it is determined that a robot's hardware has failed. No intervention will occur in the Virtual competition.
     
     5.2. If a robot is stuck on April Cubes for more than 30 seconds, the robot will be moved approximately one meter away and have its heading maintained.

     5.3. Robots that get stuck on arena walls or other robots will be moved approximately one meter away and turned to face away from the object. 
     
     5.4. If the same robot has gotten stuck on or collided with the same object(s) three times within a 1 minute period, the robot will be moved one meter away and turned to face away from the object. A recurrence of persistent collisions by a rover after having been oriented away from the obstacle may result in the rover's motors being switched off. This decision is at the discretion of the arena tech in consultation with the head tech. This is to avoid having the robot wranglers entirely occupied with preventing a rover from colliding repeatedly during the run.
     
     5.5. Each robot must operate at a safe speed in order to avoid damage from collisions with the walls and with other robots. At the discretion of Physical Competition judges, robots that repeatedly crash into walls, obstacles, or each other at high speeds will be removed from the arena for the remainder of the round.
     
     5.6. Before a robot is moved, its red emergency switch will be switched down to prevent the motors from turning and encoders detecting wheel motion. 

     5.7. If a robot fails because of a hardware malfunction, we will replace the robot during the run. These kinds of failures are sometimes as obvious as a wheel coming off, but it is often difficult to distinguish hardware and software failures. We will keep a close eye on all of the robots' network status, node output/status, sensor outputs, and diagnostic outputs. If a robot is behaving very differently from the others, then we will investigate closely from the master laptop. The arena tech in consultation with the lead tech will determine whether it is appropriate to replace a robot.

     5.7.1. If the techs determine that a robot needs to be replaced, the robot will be pulled from the arena and a standby robot will be set in the center at the arena's start position. Each arena will have at least two standby robots. These will be turned on for the entire run but will not have code running. Once the replacement is set at the arena's starting position it will be initialized and your team's code will start to run. We will work through this process as quickly as possible but it will take some time.

     5.7.2. Robots pulled from arenas for replacement will be taken to a repair trailer where the problem will be diagnosed and repaired by the hardware tech. The robot will be documented and then returned as standby for its original arena. Examples from previous years have included: motor hardware failure, cowcatchers detaching, and gripper hardware failure. 
   
     5.8. In the event of a robot failing to operate correctly due to a software malfunction outside the control of the team, the robot may be moved to a starting location near the collection zone and have its software restarted. The decision to restart a robot lies with the arena tech in consultation with the head tech. Example failures from previous years include the Ublox GPS node crashing. In rare cases, a software failure could require robot replacement. The same procedures for replacement due to physical malfunctions will be followed.


6. Breaking a tie

     6.1. In the event of a tie for 8th place at the end of the preliminary round, for 4th place at the end of the quarter-final round, 2nd place at the end of the semi-final round, or for the winner of the final round, the tied teams will compete head-to-head during a special tie breaker match. For this match, each team's robots and resources will be reset within their respective arenas. The team whose robots find and collect the most resources in 10 minutes will move on to the next round. If teams are still tied at the conclusion of the overtime match, the match will continue in a "sudden death" form, where the first team to score wins. If no team scores within 10 minutes in the sudden death phase neither team will move forward. 
     
     6.2. The head judge will make the final decision on resolving tie breakers.


7. Modifying the SwarmBaseCode-ROS code base


   7.1. Teams participating in the Physical competition are encouraged to modify any parts of the SwarmBaseCode-ROS code base, including adding or deleting ROS packages to better replicate the capabilities of their physical robots. However changes to the simulation files and Gazebo Plugins may only be made if accepted by the UNM developers through a pull request to the base code. This ensures a level playing field for all teams. If you modify the GUI code and the GUI crashes during a run, we will **NOT** restart the run. However, if you have **NOT** modified the code then we will restart it. You may modify the `/misc/rover_onboard_node_launch.sh` startup script, but **do not** change the name of the script itself. All committed code that is pushed to a team's GitHub repository by the cutoff date will be pulled and run onboard robots during the Physical competition.

If you modify the GUI code and the GUI crashes during a run, we will NOT restart the run. However, if you have NOT modified the code then we will restart it.

   7.2. Teams may modify the Arduino code. Loading the Arduino code must be fully automatic and triggered from the `/misc/rover_onboard_node_launch.sh` script. *Arduino code must be stored in a subdirectory of the teams repository called `arduino/swarmie_control/`*, i.e. `Swarmathon-TeamAbbrev/arduino/swarmie_control/` where Swarmathon-TeamAbbrev is your repository name.
   
   7.3. Because custom Arduino code requires extra logistics at the competition we need to know which teams will have modified Arduino code well before the competition. **Teams planning to modify the Arduino code must notify us at info@nasaswarmathon.com by March 10th, 2019.**

   7.4. **The rover status message must be modified to contain with a preceding "+" symbol. We will reload the stock arduino code after a run where custom arduino code was used.**

   7.5. Teams may not modify the contents of `/src/gazebo_plugins`.
   


8. Head judge discretion

   8.1. The head judge may disqualify a team at any point during the competition at their discretion.
  
   8.2. The head judge may modify these rules due to weather events or unforeseen circumstances.
  
   8.3. Competition rounds may be re-run at the discretion of the head judge. 

9. Obstacles

   9.1. Obstacles may be placed anywhere in the arena. There may be any number of obstacles.

   9.2. The obstacle size and shape will be the same as those modeled in the Gazebo simulations provided to teams.

   9.3. The placement and number of obstacles will not be communicated to teams before the competition.

10. Calibration Values

   We will provide a comma delimited file called KSC.cal to store the calibration values we obtain at UNM in the root of the home directory, i.e. `~/KSC.cal`. The calibration file will be in the following format:

   `min: { -N1, -N2, -N3 }  max: { +N4, +N5, +N6 }` 

   Where N1 through N6 are natural numbers. This is the same format the calibration code produces.  

   Before the competition the UNM tech team will calibrate the rovers and populate the KSC.cal file with the offset values.  

   We will also provide extended calibration data, this is at the request of teams who are writing custom Arduino code. This extended data will be stored in `~/KSC_extended_calibration.csv` and has the following format:

   `mag.X,mag.Y,mag.Z,accel.X,accel.Y,accel.Z,temperature (high
byte),temperature (low byte)`
