Swarmie User Manual.md, before:

## Quick Start Guide for Physical Robots

If you have not yet built your robots, please consult our [Assembly Manual](https://github.com/BCLab-UNM/Swarmathon-Robot/tree/master/AssemblyManual) for instructions on doing so.

### 1. Initial Setup

Connect the Intel NUC onboard your robot to a keyboard (USB), mouse (USB), and monitor (HDMI). Ensure that the motors are turned off (the red switch is down), then turn the NUC on.

If your robot does not yet have an operating system (OS) installed on it, begin by installing the 64-bit Desktop version of [Ubuntu 14.04](http://releases.ubuntu.com/14.04/). The simplest method for installing Ubuntu is to use a USB flash drive following the [appropriate instructions](https://help.ubuntu.com/community/Installation/FromUSBStick) for your particular PC OS.

If your robot is not yet running ROS Indigo and the Swarmathon-ROS base code, please follow the instructions in the [Swarmathon-ROS README](https://github.com/BCLab-UNM/Swarmathon-ROS/blob/master/README.md).

Finally, if you've recently completed a fresh install of Ubuntu 14.04 (whether following the instructions above or any other instructions), ensure that OpenSSH Server is installed by typing `sudo apt-get install openssh-server`.

### 2. Hostname and Hosts File Configuration

1. Your robot's hostname should be changed so that each robot will be uniquely identified on your LAN. To change your hostname, open a **Terminal** window and enter ```sudo nano /etc/hostname```. Enter the password you set during the OS installation process when prompted.

2. This file should contain one line with the word "ubuntu". Delete "ubuntu" and replace it with your chosen hostname. Any hostname composed of alphanumeric characters will work; be sure to remember your hostname for later use. Use <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>x</kbd> to save your change and exit the editor.

3. From the Bash prompt, enter ```sudo nano /etc/hosts```.

4. The second line of the **hosts** file should read ```127.0.1.1   ubuntu```. Delete "ubuntu" and replace it with the hostname you chose in step 2.

5. At this point, you should also add to the **hosts** file the IP addresses and hostnames of any other machines on your network (including other robots) that you plan to run Swarmathon-ROS on. For example, you would add a machine named "alpha" with an IP address of "192.168.1.2" by inserting ```192.168.1.2   alpha``` at a new line in the **hosts** file.

6. Once all relevant machines have been added, use <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>x</kbd> to save your change and exit the editor.

### 3. Running Swarmathon-ROS on a Swarmie

Disconnect the keyboard, mouse, and monitor from your robot and place it on a large, flat surface. Ensure that the motors are now turned on (the red switch is up), and that the NUC is on. To start the ROS base code on the robot, follow the directions below:

1. Using another Ubuntu machine that is connected to the same WLAN as your robot, and that has the Swarmathon-ROS code base installed, follow the **hosts** file setup from Section 2 to ensure that your robot's IP address and hostname have been added to your Ubuntu machine's **hosts** file.

2. Open a **Terminal** window, run ```cd ~/rover_workspace```, then run ```./run.sh``` to start the Swarmathon-ROS GUI.

3. Open a second **Terminal** window and connect to your robot by running the command ```ssh robotUserName@robotHostName```, where "robotUserName" and "robotHostName" should be replaced by the username and hostname you selected. When prompted, enter your password.

4. Once the SSH session connects, run the command ```~/rover_workspace/misc/rover_onboard_node_launch.sh machineHostName```, where "machineHostName" should be replaced by the hostname of the machine you're currently using.

In your Swarmathon-ROS GUI window, you should see the name of your robot appear in the "Rovers:" box on the left side. It may take up to 10 seconds for the robot's name to appear. When you click on the robot's name, you should see it's camera view appear in the GUI window, along with data from the ultrasonic sensors, IMU, and motor encoders.

Observe the robot for several minutes. If everything is working correctly, you should observe the following indicator lights:

1. A solid green light on the camera

2. A rapidly blinking green light on all three ultrasonic sensors

3. A solid green light on the GPS board on the right side of the robot, and possibly a slow blinking red light if the robot is outside and has achieved a GPS lock

4. A very rapidly blinking, near-solid red light on the microcontroller underneath the Intel NUC

When you are satisfied that the robot is operating correctly as per the specs above, you may shut it down by flipping the red switch down and holding the power button on the NUC for five seconds.

Your robot is now ready for you to use! Please repeat this process for all 3 of your robots.

### 4. Swarmie Maintenance

To charge your robots, plug each of your three smart chargers into standard wall outlets, then connect each of your three robots to the smart chargers via the barrel jack at the rear of the robots (to the right of the red power switch). You should see a red light on the smart charger, which indicates a solid connection. Charge the robot until the light on the smart charger turns green, which indicates that the battery is fully charged, then disconnect the charger. Note that fully charging the battery can take up to 12 hours, and the battery manufacturer stipulates that batteries should be attended during charge to mitigate fire risk (see the Safety Guide for more information about battery charging).

Never run your robots unattended, and handle your robots carefully. You may carry them by the cover plate, but avoid jarring them, dropping them, or crashing them at high speeds. Robots should be able to handle a few bumps into each other, but if they bump into a wall or immovable obstacle at high speed (or sometimes even at low speed), they may flip over and will need to be promptly uprighted.

Operate robots at a safe speed. There are no funds available to repair robots that are damaged due to high speed crashes (or falling down stairs, getting wet, etc.) Additionally, when robots move at high speeds, the ultrasounds may not respond fast enough to avoid crashes into walls, and the camera may not be able to detect April Tags.

Robot wheels may become loose and disengage after repeated testing. Although the robots are capable of driving on only three wheels, you should reattach any loose wheel(s) following the wheel installation instructions in the Swarmie Build Guide.

If you encounter any issues with your robots, please contact the Swarmathon team at [Info@NasaSwarmathon.com](Info@NasaSwarmathon.com), or post questions in the Hardware section of the [NASA Swarmathon Q&A Forum](http://nasaswarmathon.com/qa-forum/), and we’ll help you to diagnose and repair the problem.

Commit message:

Add joystick testing to Guide

Swarmie User Manual.md, after:

## Quick Start Guide for Physical Robots

If you have not yet built your robots, please consult our [Assembly Manual](https://github.com/BCLab-UNM/Swarmathon-Robot/tree/master/AssemblyManual) for instructions on doing so.

### 1. Initial Setup

Connect the Intel NUC onboard your robot to a keyboard (USB), mouse (USB), and monitor (HDMI). Ensure that the motors are turned off (the red switch is down), then turn the NUC on.

If your robot does not yet have an operating system (OS) installed on it, begin by installing the 64-bit Desktop version of [Ubuntu 14.04](http://releases.ubuntu.com/14.04/). The simplest method for installing Ubuntu is to use a USB flash drive following the [appropriate instructions](https://help.ubuntu.com/community/Installation/FromUSBStick) for your particular PC OS.

If your robot is not yet running ROS Indigo and the Swarmathon-ROS base code, please follow the instructions in the [Swarmathon-ROS README](https://github.com/BCLab-UNM/Swarmathon-ROS/blob/master/README.md).

Finally, if you've recently completed a fresh install of Ubuntu 14.04 (whether following the instructions above or any other instructions), ensure that OpenSSH Server is installed by typing `sudo apt-get install openssh-server`.

### 2. Hostname and Hosts File Configuration

1. Your robot's hostname should be changed so that each robot will be uniquely identified on your LAN. To change your hostname, open a **Terminal** window and enter ```sudo nano /etc/hostname```. Enter the password you set during the OS installation process when prompted.

2. This file should contain one line with the word "ubuntu". Delete "ubuntu" and replace it with your chosen hostname. Any hostname composed of alphanumeric characters will work; be sure to remember your hostname for later use. Use <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>x</kbd> to save your change and exit the editor.

3. From the Bash prompt, enter ```sudo nano /etc/hosts```.

4. The second line of the **hosts** file should read ```127.0.1.1   ubuntu```. Delete "ubuntu" and replace it with the hostname you chose in step 2.

5. At this point, you should also add to the **hosts** file the IP addresses and hostnames of any other machines on your network (including other robots) that you plan to run Swarmathon-ROS on. For example, you would add a machine named "alpha" with an IP address of "192.168.1.2" by inserting ```192.168.1.2   alpha``` at a new line in the **hosts** file.

6. Once all relevant machines have been added, use <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>x</kbd> to save your change and exit the editor.

### 3. Running Swarmathon-ROS on a Swarmie

Disconnect the keyboard, mouse, and monitor from your robot and place it on a large, flat surface. Ensure that the motors are now turned on (the red switch is up), and that the NUC is on. To start the ROS base code on the robot, follow the directions below:

1. Using another Ubuntu machine that is connected to the same WLAN as your robot, and that has the Swarmathon-ROS code base installed, follow the **hosts** file setup from Section 2 to ensure that your robot's IP address and hostname have been added to your Ubuntu machine's **hosts** file.

2. Open a **Terminal** window, run ```cd ~/rover_workspace```, then run ```./run.sh``` to start the Swarmathon-ROS GUI.

3. Open a second **Terminal** window and connect to your robot by running the command ```ssh robotUserName@robotHostName```, where "robotUserName" and "robotHostName" should be replaced by the username and hostname you selected. When prompted, enter your password.

4. Once the SSH session connects, run the command ```~/rover_workspace/misc/rover_onboard_node_launch.sh machineHostName```, where "machineHostName" should be replaced by the hostname of the machine you're currently using.

In your Swarmathon-ROS GUI window, you should see the name of your robot appear in the "Rovers:" box on the left side. It may take up to 10 seconds for the robot's name to appear. When you click on the robot's name, you should see it's camera view appear in the GUI window, along with data from the ultrasonic sensors, IMU, and motor encoders.

Observe the robot for several minutes. If everything is working correctly, you should observe the following indicator lights:

1. A solid green light on the camera

2. A rapidly blinking green light on all three ultrasonic sensors

3. A solid green light on the GPS board on the right side of the robot, and possibly a slow blinking red light if the robot is outside and has achieved a GPS lock

4. A very rapidly blinking, near-solid red light on the microcontroller underneath the Intel NUC

You should also test the joystick control of your robot using either a Microsoft Xbox 360 Controller or the <kbd>i</kbd>, <kbd>j</kbd>, <kbd>k</kbd>, and <kbd>l<kbd> keys on your keyboard.

When you are satisfied that the robot is operating correctly as per the specs above, you may shut it down by flipping the red switch down and holding the power button on the NUC for five seconds.

Your robot is now ready for you to use! Please repeat this process for all 3 of your robots.

### 4. Swarmie Maintenance

To charge your robots, plug each of your three smart chargers into standard wall outlets, then connect each of your three robots to the smart chargers via the barrel jack at the rear of the robots (to the right of the red power switch). You should see a red light on the smart charger, which indicates a solid connection. Charge the robot until the light on the smart charger turns green, which indicates that the battery is fully charged, then disconnect the charger. Note that fully charging the battery can take up to 12 hours, and the battery manufacturer stipulates that batteries should be attended during charge to mitigate fire risk (see the Safety Guide for more information about battery charging).

Never run your robots unattended, and handle your robots carefully. You may carry them by the cover plate, but avoid jarring them, dropping them, or crashing them at high speeds. Robots should be able to handle a few bumps into each other, but if they bump into a wall or immovable obstacle at high speed (or sometimes even at low speed), they may flip over and will need to be promptly uprighted.

Operate robots at a safe speed. There are no funds available to repair robots that are damaged due to high speed crashes (or falling down stairs, getting wet, etc.) Additionally, when robots move at high speeds, the ultrasounds may not respond fast enough to avoid crashes into walls, and the camera may not be able to detect April Tags.

Robot wheels may become loose and disengage after repeated testing. Although the robots are capable of driving on only three wheels, you should reattach any loose wheel(s) following the wheel installation instructions in the Swarmie Build Guide.

If you encounter any issues with your robots, please contact the Swarmathon team at [Info@NasaSwarmathon.com](Info@NasaSwarmathon.com), or post questions in the Hardware section of the [NASA Swarmathon Q&A Forum](http://nasaswarmathon.com/qa-forum/), and we’ll help you to diagnose and repair the problem.
